---
layout: page
title: Entropy of a Discrete Information Source
slug: entropy-of-a-discrete-information-source
---

:::definition "Entropy of a Source"
Consider a discrete source with $i$ finite number of states, where in state $i$ there is probability $p_i(j)$ of producing symbol $j.$ Then, each state $i$ will have an entropy $H_i,$ and the **entropy of the source** will be defined as the average of these $H_i$ weighted by the probability of the occurrence of each state ($P_i$):

$$ \begin{aligned}
H & = \sum_{i} P_i H_i \\
  & = - \sum_{i,j} P_i p_i(j) \log{p_i(j)}.
\end{aligned}

In other words, $H = \mathbb{E}[H_i]$ - the @expected-value of the per state entropy.

This is the entropy of the source per symbol of text.

If the source (a @markoff-process) produces symbols at a definite time rate there is also an @entropy per second:

$$ H' = \sum_{i} f_i H_i,$$

where $f_i$ is the average @frequency of state $i.$ We can also say

$$ H' = mH, $$

where $m$ is the average number of symbols produced per seconds, i.e. $f_i = m P_i$

$H$ an $H'$ measure the amount of information generated by the source per symbol and per second, respectively. For $\log_2$, they represent bits per symbol and bits per second.
:::

Simplifying, when successive symbols are @independent, $H = - \sum p_i \log(p_i),$ where $p_i$ is the probability of symbol $i.$ Consider a long message $S$ of $N$ symbols. It will contain, with high probability, about $p_i N$ occurrences of $x_1,$ $p_2 N$ of $x_2,$ etc. Therefore the probability of $S$ is approximately

$$ p = p_1^{p_1 N} p_2^{p_2 N} \cdots p_n^{p_n N} = \prod_{i} p_i^{p_i N}, $$

so

$$ \begin{aligned}
\log{p} & \approx N \sum_{i} \left [ p_i \log{p_i} \right ] \\
\log{p} & \approx - N H \\
H & \approx \frac{\log{1/p}}{N}.
\end{aligned} $$

so @entropy is approximately the log of the reciprocal probability of a long sequence divided by the number of symbols in the sequence. The theorem below states this more formally.

:::theorem
Let $\epsilon, \delta > 0.$ Then, we can find an $N_0$ such that the sequences of any length $N \geq N_0$ fall into two classes:

1. A set whose total probability is less than $\epsilon.$

2. The remainder, all of whose members have probabilities satisfying the inequality

$$ \left | \frac{\log{p^{-1}}}{N} - H \right | \leq \delta. $$

In other words, we are almost certain to have $\frac{\log{p^{-1}}}{N} very close to $H$ when $N$ is large.
:::


:::theorem "Noiseless channel transmitting discrete symbols"
Given a communication channel which has a @capacity of $C$ bits per second, accepting signals from a source of @entropy (or information) of $H$ bits per symbols, it is possible, given a properly devised coding procedure, for the transmitter to transmit symbols over the channel at an average rate which is nearly $C/H$ but which, no matter how clever the coding, can never exceed $C/H.$
:::
:::note
The unit of $C$ is bits (information) per second, and the unit of $H$ is bits (information) per symbol, so we have

$$ \frac{bits}{second} \times \frac{symbols}{bit} = \frac{symbols}{second}, $$

so the unit of $C/H$ is symbols per second.

The best transmitter is one which codes the message in such a way that maximizes the signal entropy and makes it equal to the capacity of the channel, which allows reaching the maximum rate $C/H$ for the transmission of symbols.
:::
